Here’s a more detailed breakdown for each slide in the Ansible Basic Training and Deployment Strategy presentation. This includes specific details and examples you could use to make the slides more informative and engaging.


---

Slide 1: Title Slide

Title: "Ansible Basic Training & Deployment Strategy"

Subtitle: "Introduction to Automation with Ansible"

Your Name: Trainer’s Name

Date: Training Date



---

Slide 2: Agenda

1. Introduction to Ansible


2. Key Components of Ansible


3. Ansible Basics and Core Concepts


4. Writing and Running Ansible Playbooks


5. Deployment Strategy Overview


6. Case Study: Deploying with Ansible


7. Best Practices and Q&A




---

Slide 3: Introduction to Ansible

Definition:

Ansible is an open-source tool for automation, configuration management, and orchestration.

It uses simple, human-readable YAML syntax, making it accessible for both beginners and advanced users.


Key Benefits:

Agentless: No software agents are required on managed nodes. It communicates over SSH, which simplifies setup and maintenance.

Idempotent: Ensures that tasks yield the same result, no matter how many times they're applied.

Modular and Flexible: Supports various modules and plugins to expand functionality.


Use Cases:

Provisioning servers

Configuring applications

Deploying applications across environments

Orchestrating multi-tier deployments




---

Slide 4: Ansible Architecture

Control Node: The machine where Ansible is installed, from which playbooks are run.

Managed Nodes: The target systems that are configured and managed by Ansible.

Inventory:

Static Inventory: A list of target hosts defined in a simple text file.

Dynamic Inventory: Queries external services (e.g., AWS, GCP) to automatically update the list of hosts.


Modules: Ansible’s building blocks, each of which accomplishes a specific task, like installing packages, managing files, and configuring networks.

Playbooks: YAML files containing a series of tasks that describe the desired state and actions to perform on managed nodes.

Plugins:

Enable extended functionalities (e.g., connection for SSH, callback for logs).


Facts: Data gathered about systems (e.g., IP address, OS type) that helps Ansible make informed decisions during playbook runs.



---

Slide 5: Core Concepts and Terminology

Task: An individual action within a playbook, such as installing a package or starting a service.

Play: A series of tasks run on a specified set of hosts.

Role: A way to organize playbooks by function, dividing them into reusable components (e.g., web server, database).

Variables: Allow for parameterizing playbooks to add flexibility, making playbooks adaptable to different environments or use cases.

Facts: Automatically gathered data (using the setup module) that provides system details (e.g., OS family, memory).


Example Terminology:

- name: Install Apache on Web Server
  hosts: web
  tasks:
    - name: Install Apache package
      yum:
        name: httpd
        state: present


---

Slide 6: Installing Ansible

Prerequisites:

Python (Ansible is written in Python)

SSH access to managed nodes


Installation Steps:

On a Linux control node, use: sudo apt install ansible (Ubuntu) or sudo yum install ansible (RHEL).


Verifying Installation:

Run ansible --version to check Ansible’s version.

Confirm SSH connectivity to managed nodes: ansible all -m ping to test connectivity to all hosts in inventory.




---

Slide 7: Writing a Simple Playbook

Basic Playbook Structure:

- name: Configure Web Server
  hosts: web
  tasks:
    - name: Install Apache
      yum:
        name: httpd
        state: present
    - name: Start Apache Service
      service:
        name: httpd
        state: started

Explanation:

Name: Label for the play.

Hosts: Specifies target hosts (group or individual hosts).

Tasks: Each action to execute, like installing packages or managing services.


Running a Playbook:

Command: ansible-playbook playbook.yml

Show sample output with Ansible’s task summary.




---

Slide 8: Inventory and Ad-hoc Commands

Inventory File Structure:

[web]
web1.example.com
web2.example.com

[database]
db1.example.com

Groupings: Use groups to organize hosts (e.g., [web], [database]).

Ad-hoc Commands:

Execute tasks without writing playbooks.

Example: ansible all -m ping or ansible web -m yum -a "name=httpd state=latest"

Useful for quick tasks or testing.




---

Slide 9: Ansible Modules

Core Modules:

file: Manage files and directories

- name: Create directory
  file:
    path: /tmp/demo
    state: directory

yum / apt: Manage packages

service: Manage services (start, stop, restart)

copy: Copy files from the control node to the managed nodes


Example:

- name: Copy index.html to Web Server
  copy:
    src: /path/to/index.html
    dest: /var/www/html/index.html



---

Slide 10: Roles in Ansible

What are Roles?

Way to organize playbooks for reuse and scalability.

Follows a specific directory structure: tasks/, handlers/, vars/, files/, templates/, meta/.


Creating Roles:

Initialize with ansible-galaxy init <role_name>.


Including Roles in Playbooks:

- hosts: web
  roles:
    - apache



---

Slide 11: Deployment Strategy Overview

Rolling Deployment:

Gradually deploy changes to a subset of servers, minimizing downtime.


Blue-Green Deployment:

Deploy changes to a separate environment, then switch traffic to the new version.


Canary Deployment:

Release changes to a small subset of users first, then gradually increase.


Choosing a Strategy:

Consider stability, rollback requirements, and load balancing.




---

Slide 12: Ansible in Deployment Pipelines

Integrating Ansible with CI/CD Tools:

Example with Jenkins: trigger Ansible playbooks as part of the deployment pipeline.

Steps: Code pushed to Git → Jenkins triggers Ansible playbook → Deploy to staging or production.


Automation Flow:

Code commit > Jenkins build > Playbook execution > Post-deployment checks.




---

Slide 13: Case Study: Sample Deployment with Ansible

Scenario: Deploy a web application on a fleet of servers.

Steps:

Provision servers with necessary packages.

Deploy application files from source control.

Configure web and database services.

Set up load balancer and conduct health checks.


Outcome:

Automated, reliable, and repeatable deployments.




---

Slide 14: Best Practices for Ansible and Deployment

Organize playbooks: Use roles for modularity and reuse.

Use variables and templates: Customize playbooks for multiple environments.

Maintain idempotency: Ensure tasks won’t break when run repeatedly.

Test thoroughly: Always test playbooks in a staging environment.

Documentation: Provide comments and documentation for clarity.



---

Slide 15: Conclusion and Q&A

Key Takeaways:

Ansible basics, components, and key commands.

How to create playbooks and deploy applications.

Various deployment strategies and best practices.


Questions: Invite attendees to ask any questions about Ansible, automation, or deployment strategies.



---

This expanded outline includes detailed explanations and practical examples, which can be further tailored with screenshots, code snippets, and real-world scenarios. Let me know if you need any additional specifics or examples!

