Here is a proposed structure for your PowerPoint presentation on demonstrating Jenkins and Ansible with a shell script for IKP deployment:


---

Slide 1: Title Slide

Title: Automating IKP Deployment with Jenkins and Ansible

Subtitle: Integrating Jenkins Pipeline, Ansible, and Shell Scripts

Your Name/Team Name

Date



---

Slide 2: Agenda

1. Overview of IKP Deployment


2. Tools and Technologies Used


3. Jenkins Pipeline Flow


4. Ansible Automation Workflow


5. Shell Script Integration


6. Demo and Key Outcomes




---

Slide 3: IKP Deployment Overview

Objective: Automate the deployment of IKP using a seamless integration of CI/CD tools.

Key Steps:

1. Generate IKP certificates using Vault token.


2. Apply Kubernetes manifest for deployment.



Challenges Addressed:

Manual errors.

Faster deployments.




---

Slide 4: Tools and Technologies

Jenkins: Orchestrates the deployment pipeline and passes variables.

Ansible: Automates script execution and environment setup.

Shell Script: Handles the generation of certificates and deployment commands.

Vault: Manages secure access to tokens for certificate generation.

Kubernetes: Hosts and manages the microservices.



---

Slide 5: Jenkins Pipeline Workflow

Step 1: Define variables for the deployment (e.g., environment, manifest path).

Step 2: Pass variables to Ansible using parameters.

Step 3: Trigger Ansible playbook execution.

Key Variables:

Vault token: VAULT_TOKEN

Environment: ENVIRONMENT

Manifest Path: Manifest_Path




---

Slide 6: Ansible Automation Workflow

Playbook Tasks:

1. Download the required shell script (ASB.sh).


2. Create necessary directories and paths.


3. Execute the script with Jenkins-provided variables.


4. Verify the certificate creation and manifest deployment.



Command Execution:

./ASB.sh username password service environment version vaulta vaultb



---

Slide 7: Shell Script Role

Purpose: Automates the process of:

1. Connecting to IKP using Vault token.


2. Creating the necessary IKP certificates.


3. Applying the Kubernetes manifest file.



Key Snippet:

vault login $VAULT_TOKEN
ikp-cli create-cert --env $ENVIRONMENT --path $Manifest_Path
kubectl apply -f $Manifest_Path



---

Slide 8: Demo Workflow

1. Initiate Jenkins Job:

Pass required variables (environment, manifest path, Vault token).



2. Ansible Execution:

Download and execute the shell script.



3. Certificate Generation:

Vault token used to authenticate and create IKP certificates.



4. Kubernetes Deployment:

Manifest applied for deployment.





---

Slide 9: Key Outcomes

Automation Achieved: Complete automation of the IKP deployment process.

Reduced Manual Errors: Elimination of manual intervention.

Time Efficiency: Faster deployments and better scalability.

Enhanced Security: Secure token-based authentication with Vault.



---

Slide 10: Conclusion

Summary: Jenkins and Ansible streamline the IKP deployment process with enhanced efficiency and security.

Future Scope: Scaling the solution for multi-environment deployments.

Q&A



---

Let me know if you'd like help with slide designs or detailed text for any specific sections!

